to people in the front seat heading out to the
airport? I got to the airport. And the first thing I
better do is make sure that the people at the
airport had confirmed my tickets, my change of
flight. And so I got in that line. And the Chinese
are not too good about fast, friendly service. So I
must have waited in that line for about an hour.
There was one man and his wife from our U.S. State
Department who were out there. The wife's mother
had been visiting in Beijing and was supposed to
stay on longer, but had decided with what had
happened, she wanted to go back home. And I
couldn't believe this husband and wife. They were
telling me, oh, you know, it's mother-in-law.
She's just, you know, blowing this all out of
proportion. And, you know, nothing really
serious has happened here. And I thought, this is
our State Department.
I was able to confirm my flights. They had me down
for the next morning or the next day. I looked at the
board of other options of flights to see if there
was anything else that was going down. And about
the only option that I had was a flight that was
leaving that evening, going to Tehran. And of
course, Ayatollah Khomeini had just died
recently, too. So I figured that was probably the
place I'd rather be better off in Beijing than I
would be in Tehran. So there really weren't any
other options. I found United Airlines. They got a
little office that's downstairs in the basement.
Because they only fly in a couple of times a week.
It's not staffed all the time. Which airline was
it? It was United Airlines. That's what the kids
were going to fly out on. They were going to come
into Beijing on. And I had flown in on. We were going
to fly from Hong Kong to Tokyo and back to the US on
them. There was a janitor down there, fortunately
he spoke a little bit of English, and there was a
sign on the board saying that the flight had been
delayed, and it wasn't going to get in until
Tuesday morning. The flight your kids were
supposed to be on? They were supposed to be on,
right. He couldn't add anything else to that, and I
thought, well, if it's open early enough in the
morning, I'll check and see if that's possible. It
turned out that flight ended up being canceled,
and they were going to come in. I had my bags, I went
up,
and there were, I guess, about 200 of us who had done
the same thing as I had. So, it's a pretty big
airport, so it really wasn't very crowded. How
big? Can you give us an idea of size? As big as one of
the terminals? It's about the size of one of the
terminals at Houston and Continental.
on not the different corridors that go out to the
planes, just one level of where you check in and
your bags are.
And one Chinese student who was going over to
Germany came over and started a conversation with
me. And he was from Shanghai and was trying to get
out before everything completely fell apart. But
mostly kept to myself. Everybody had some food
that they had bought at various types of events, so
I ate a little bit and ended up sleeping on top of a
desk where you go into for the customs inspection.
I was still, I had, after I had checked and made sure
that My tickets were okay. There is a hotel that
they had built that was out right near the airport.
There were still cabs coming in at the airport, so I
went out and got one of the cabs there to take me to
this hotel to see if they had a room for the night,
because I figured, of course, the worst, I could
walk the next morning, because it was maybe half a
mile, three-quarters of a mile. They took me
there. That hotel was all full. And they suggested
I go into Toledo. And I said, no, I don't want to go in
any closer to town. So there was a cab that was there
going back to the airport. It already had three
Chinese in it. And so the trunk was pretty well
filled. But the guy, for a reasonable price, was
willing to take me there. And he did. He got me back
to the airport. I spent the night at the airport.
The next morning, some more people started
arriving because there were two flights that I was
on, and then there were some flights later on that
were leaving. I was concerned about them perhaps
closing down the airport, but they didn't.
Getting on an airplane is not an only thing in
China. One of the things that I was concerned about
were the customs people and going through customs
because I had a roll of film that I'd taken out of my
camera, the one that I'd taken the pictures the
night before, and I was concerned if I got caught
with those on me that that could create some
problems. But I had mixed it in with the other
touristy roles that I'd taken. Of course, in
China, whether you're innocent or guilty, it
doesn't make a difference. If the government
wants to get you, they'll just make up anything
that they want to. It's not proving innocence or
guilt. But I had put that in there. And as it turned
out, the customs people never showed up. Or if they
did, they came later on in the day. But first of all,
you have to go through this line. And the customs
people are supposed to look at your bags. Well,
they weren't there. So we just went on through
there. And then you've got to show your tickets to
the people and check your bags. But you also have to
get this little stamp I said, departure tax stamp,
separate. There's a separate little booth that
you've got to go to. Well, I didn't know which one
you had to go to first. So I got in line for the booth
thing, and the people were taking a lot. It seemed
like they should have already been there, because
they were already checking some people in. But I
went with this one guy. He said, you know, if you'll
give me the money, I'll get the tax point, the stamp
point. You can go ahead and get in line. So I said,
well. you know, I'll do that. It wasn't all that
much money. And he got it for me and gave it to me. And
I had to go, because there were two flights, I had to
go around behind where this booth was and get in
this other line that was packed with people. And
there were all kinds of people who didn't have
tickets who were trying to get on this plane and
that. And they don't really have the concept of a
line. You wait, you turn the line. You just It's
everybody for himself, and you've got to just
jockey for position and protect your own
position. Well, I finally got up to the front, and I
showed them my tickets, and they accepted them,
and they sent my, well, the belt that they have
there to take the bags down to the basement where
they load the things, it broke down. It wasn't
working, so people were just literally climbing
up on their stack of their bags on this belt, trying
to get theirs up closer to the front so that it would
go down, I kept my carry on my handbag with me that
had the porn stuff in it and went ahead and went out
to the waiting area. And the pilot showed up. We got
on the plane. We left. It took us about 20 minutes to
get to Tangier. I was concerned there because this
was another chance for them to decide This was
getting later in the morning, getting around
noon, you know, that they were going to shut
everything down. We got off the plane. We were
supposed to be there for an hour. When we landed,
they made us all get off because there were some
Chinese who weren't going on. They were getting on
Tianjin. There were some people who were
continuing on. There were some new people who were
going to get off. They made all of us get off. And I
started talking with a man and his wife and their
two kids. They were... living in Beijing, outside
of Beijing, north of Beijing, he was there setting
up a poultry farm for poultry, chicken. And, you
know, they were leaving. They really didn't want
to leave. They were concerned about their friends
who were back, but talk to them. And I was getting
concerned because it Took longer than an hour, an
hour and a half. We were getting there in two hours.
We were sitting there, we were supposed to be there
for an hour. And I was afraid maybe they decided
they were going to shut down all the airports.
Finally got back on the plane and took off and
landed in Hong Kong Tuesday afternoon. And once I
got in Hong Kong, then I felt safe. Of course, Hong
Kong was having some demonstrations. As a matter
of fact, I was concerned when I checked into the
hotel. Because I was there earlier, I wasn't
supposed to be there until Sunday. I went to the
hotel that I had made reservations for. But they
weren't sure they were going to have a room or not. I
got there about 3 in the afternoon. They told me to
come back in an hour. And that's what everybody's
supposed to be checking if you're not. And I ended
up being able to get a room there. Asked them how
long it would take me to get to the airport the next
day. And they said, well, you better leave early.
You better leave before 8, even though my plane was
going to leave until 11. because they were
expecting a big demonstration of three fourths of
a million people, they would clog up the streets.
So I called my wife, let her know that I had gotten
out of Beijing. You had no difficulty in making
that call out of Hong Kong. At the airport in
Beijing, there were no telephones. They had some
telephone booths, but there weren't any
telephones in there. So there was no way to call out
from the airport to let her know that I'd gotten
that far. But when I called her, you know, let her
know that everything was okay. And then got a good
night's sleep and then left on Wednesday, left
Hong Kong on Wednesday to go to Tokyo and then back.
And Tokyo to Houston? Well, to San Francisco and
then to Houston. okay um i have like two questions
i'd like to ask one if you could do the trip over
again would there be any one thing that you wished
you had made a different choice at i i guess the the
main thing in terms of a different choice is that i
wish i had gotten some blow my camera somebody else
get a picture of me standing in front of the the
statute, the Gossett democracy. I was going to
have all three of us, myself and our two kids, do
that. Of course, now that opportunity is gone.
Some people ask, why didn't you go back down to the
square? Why didn't you try to see what was going on?
And I realized that that would be a very foolish
thing to do. And I still think that I made the right
decision. Once the violence broke out, I realized
even though it was not directed towards
foreigners, if I just happened to be in the wrong
place at the wrong time, they were going to stop
shooting because, oh, there goes a foreigner. We
don't want to shoot him. So I think that I made the
right decision there. OK. And then lastly, you
shared about the camera. So you had that as visual
images of where you had been. When you got back to
College Station, I know you had shared with me an
article you wrote called China's Pro-Democracy
Movement. Did you make any other written records
or journal accounts? Well, when I got back, I was
one of the first Americans who'd been to Tiananmen
Square and who had come back. So a lot of the news
media was interested in hearing what I had to say.
One of the TV stations in Houston was at the airport
when I got there, and I had a radio station in that
calling. And it
upset me in that the main thing they were
interested in was how many bodies did you see, a
body count, and how much blood was there. Not
really in terms of what was going on, what was the
significance of this thing, and what was really
happening. Of
course, my body clock, my biological clock was
off. I got back here Wednesday, and Thursday
morning, I guess about 3 o'clock in the morning, I
was, I woke up and couldn't go back to sleep, and so I
went into my den and wrote up a short article that
was later printed by several papers in Houston and
San Antonio and Austin, around the state and some
other states, kind of pulling together in a
relatively short form of what I had seen. And then
over the summer, because I'd given some talks in
that and found out more, kind of tried to make some
sense for myself as to what I was going on, what had
happened, what led up to the demonstration of what
happened there and what was going on in China over
the summer. And then I ended up with the six-page
paper that I sent you. But newspapers aren't
arrested in things that are that long or that
detailed, so it's more for personal use in
reminding me and giving to friends who were
arrested, you know, what was really happening,
what was going on. When you say the newspapers, for
example, did the local newspaper here in College
Station interested in your work, or was it only...
Yeah, both the local newspaper and the local TV
station, they came out. Again, the first question
was, you know, how many bodies did you see, how many
people did you see killed? And even though I told
them that I did not see anybody killed on that,
still in the newspaper article, There was some
mention that I'd seen some people shot. I want to
give them the benefit of the doubt. They tried the
best they could to take a relatively long
interview and get the gist of what was going on. But
I guess they think they've got to make it
interesting to the viewers and the readers, so
they've got to get some of that type of stuff in
there. I wouldn't give them the doubt. It was an
honest effort, honest mistake. They weren't
deliberately trying to twist what I had said into
something that I hadn't. Lastly, one last
question in terms of do you hope to go back to China
any time in the near future? If the opportunity
arises, I would love to be able to go back. As long as
the current regime is in, I don't know if they will
let me go back. I've been rather vocal about what I
saw. I felt that was something that I owed to the
people in Tiananmen Square. And like I said, there
were more people who were killed outside of the
square than were killed in the square. I'm
convinced that the accurate count is more around
2,000 or 3,000 than what some people are putting
around as a couple of hundred, to let the world know
what happened in the square. if I apply for a visa,
the Chinese government might not let me go back.
But if they do, I think I would be, it would be safe. I
don't think they're going to haul me off and throw
me in jail if they let me go back. Of course, I'd have
to be very careful about what I said and what I did
while I was there, but I would not give them any
excuse. And I said, if the modern element gains
control after Deng Xiaoping's death and
continues the reforms and opening up, I think it
would be safe. And I would like to go back and be able
to see what changes have taken place. And I know my
two older kids were really disappointed that they
didn't get to go and want to go back there. So if an
opportunity arises, we'll try to get there. You
would consider going back with the family? Oh,
yeah. Oh, yeah. OK. Thank you very much for sharing
with us today about your in China at a time that were
very volatile, but of which the Western world is
very interested in knowing about. Thank you
again.